\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename tbrpg.info
@settitle tbrpg
@afourpaper
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@finalout
@c %**end of header


@defindex op
@synindex op vr
@synindex cp pg


@copying
This manual is for tbrpg.

Copyright @copyright{} 2012 Mattias Andrée

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Text based roll playing game
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@title tbrpg: Text based roll playing game
@subtitle A high fantasy roll playing game engine and game collection, and best of all…
@subtitle it runs on the most powerful graphics processor… the mind.
@author Mattias Andrée, maandree@@kth.se
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@page
@*@*
@center{`This is going to be so @emph{awesome!}'}
@end titlepage

@contents



@menu
* Character attibutes::               Character attibutes.
* Magic and specialist mages::        Magic and specialist mages.
* Ability score effects::             Effects by ability scores.
* Miscellaneous attibutes::           Miscellaneous character attibutes.
* Special abilities::                 Special character abilities.
* Character actions::                 Character actions.
* Armour::                            Something about armour.
* Weapons::                           About weapons.
* Elements::                          Elemental attacks and defences.
* Experience charts::                 Experience charts.
* Spell progression::                 Spell progression charts.
* New spell charts::                  Charts with new spell learned at level up.
* Miscellaneous charts::              Miscellaneous charts.
* Combat rules::                      Combat rules.
* Time rules::                        Time rules.
* Inventory and equipment::           The inventory and equipment.
* Map and environment::               The map and environments.
* Dice and modifiers::                Dice and modifiers.
* Miscellaneous rules::               Miscellaneous rules.
* Menus and line input::              Menus and line input
* License of tbrpg::                  tbrpg's License.
* GNU General Public License::        GNU General Public License
* GNU Free Documentation License::    GNU Free Documentation License
* Concept and program index::         Concept and program index
* Variable and option index::         Variable and option index
@end menu


@node Character attibutes
@chapter Character attibutes
@cindex character attibutes
@cindex attibutes, character

@menu
* Gender::                     Character gender.
* Portrait::                   Character portrait.
* Race::                       Character race.
* Classes::                    Character classes.
* Ability scores::             Character ability scores.
* Alignment::                  Character alignment.
* Weapon proficiencies::       Weapon proficiencies.
* Thief abilities::            Thief abilities.
* Spell book::                 Character spell book.
* Racial enemy::               Racial enemy.
* Colour::                     Character colour.
* Name::                       Character name.
@end menu


@node Gender
@section Gender
@cindex character gender
@cindex gender, character

When you create your character you need to decide gender.
You can select either male or female.

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Females}
strength upper limit and lower limit is decreased by 1.
@item  @b{Males}
dexterity upper limit and lower limit is decreased by 1.
@end itemize


@node Portrait
@section Portrait
@cindex character portrait
@cindex portrait, character

@pindex @command{util-say}
@pindex @command{img2xterm}
You can choose a portrait for your character if you want.
It should not be bigger in any dimension than 80 columns
(80 pixels) and 40 lines (80 pixels). You can use
@command{util-say} or @command{img2xterm} you create a
usable raster image. Characters with a portrait are
rewarded +1 in morale.


@node Race
@section Race
@cindex character race
@cindex race, character

There are seven available character races, from which you
must choose yout character's race.

@table @bullet
@item  Human
There really is nothing special about humans.
@item  Half-Orc
Half-Orcs receive a bonus point to their strength and
constitution, but a penality point to intelligence and
charisma.
@item  Half-Elf
Half-elves have infravisiton and limited (50 %) resistance
to charm and sleep spells.
@item  Elf
Elves have infravistion and full resistance to charm and
sleep spells. They have a  −2 bonus point THAC0 when using
bows and long swords. Finally, they have a receive a bonus
point to their dexterity, but a penalty point to their
constitution.
@item  Dwarf
Dwarves have infravision and full resistance to magic and
poison. They have a receive a bonus point to their
constituion, but a penalty point to their charisma and
dexterity.
@item  Halfling
Halflings have high (75 %) resistance to poison and magic,
and have −4 2 bonus point THAC0 when using slings. They
have a receive a bonus point to their dexterity, but a
penalty point to their strength.
@item  Gnome
Gnomes have infravision and full resistance to magic, both
protective and distructive magic, but only wizard spells.
They receive a bonus point to their intelligence, but a
penalty point to their wisdom.
@end table


@node Classes
@section Classes
@cindex character classes
@cindex classes, character

The character's class is the most significant attribute
that decides how the character is player. The classes
you can select depends on the character's race.

Non-humans can be multiclassed, this is, have the
characteristics of two or three classes as the same time,
the earned experience is distributed evenly among the
classes.

Humans can dual class, that is, to forfeit leveling the
current class and instead start on the second class.
A character can only dual class once, and level 4 or
higher is required.

There are nine available classes.

@table @bullet
@item  Fighter (F)
Can wield any weapon and any armour except robes.
Can have advanced weapon speciailisation.
Can receive multiple hit bonus.
@item  Ranger (R)
Can wield any weapon and any armour except robes.
Special abilities: Charm person/mammal, Stealth.
Must be of good alignment.
@item  Paladin (P)
Can wield any weapon and any armour except robes.
Special abilities: Lay on Hands, Turn Undead,
Protection from Evil, detect Evil.
Receive +2 bonus to all Saving throws,
Must maintain lawful good alignment.
@item  Thief (T)
Cannot be of lawful good alignment.
Very restricted with what armour they can wear and
with weapones they can wield.
@item  Bard (B)
Special abilties: Pick Pockets, Bard Songs, Spell Casting.
Have very high lore. Must be have partially neutral
alignment, that is not lawful/chaotic good/evil.
@item  Cleric (C)
Special abilties: Turn Undead.
@item  Druid (D)
Special abilties: Shape Change.
@item  Mage (M)
Can learn and memorise wizard spells.
Very restricted with what armour they can wear and with
weapones they can wield, however alone with sorcerers to
be able to wear robes.
@item  Sorcerer (S)
Cannot learn spells from scrolls, but learns new wizard
spells at level up, and do not need to memorise spells, but
have a limited amouts of spells that can be used per
spell-level until rested.
Very restricted with what armour they can wear and with
weapones they can wield, however alone with mages to be
able to wear robes.
@end table

Fighter, ranger and paladin is collectively known as
warrior. Thief and bard is collectively known as rogue.
Cleric and druid is collectively known as priest. And mage
and sorcerer is collectively known as wizard.

Bards, mages and sorcerers cannot perform magic will wearing
non-leather armour. This applies even to multiclassed and
dualclasses characters.

Humans can be of any class and are alone be able to be
paladins, and any race can be of the classes fighter, thief
(with the exception for half-orc), cleric, mage and
sorcerer. Additionally elf and half-elf can be rangers, and
for half-elf, also druid and bard. However gnomes cannot be
general mages, but only illusionists (I).

The following multiclasses can be used.

@table @bullet
@item  Half-Orc
F/C
@item  Half-Elf
F/T, F/C, F/D, F/M, T/M, C/M, F/M/T, F/M/C
@item  Elf
F/T, F/M, T/M, F/M/T
@item  Dwarf
F/T, F/C
@item  Halfling
F/T
@item  Gnome
F/T, F/C, F/I, T/I, C/I, F/D, C/R, F/I/T, F/I/C
@end table


@node Ability scores
@section Ability scores
@cindex charcter ability scores
@cindex ability scores, charcter

There are six ability scores.

@itemize @bullet
@item  Strength (Warrior)
@item  Constitution
@item  Dexterity (Thief)
@item  Intelligence (Wizard)
@item  Wisdom (Priest)
@item  Charisma (Druid, bard, paladin@footnote{Charisma lower limit +14 instead of +3 for paladins})
@end itemize

By default the lower bounds are 3 and the upper bounds are 18,
one of the factors that change this is the class. In the list
above, the classes inside brackets have +6 (9 instead of 3) on
their lower bound on the indicated ability.

The score of an each ability is determined by rolling three
six-sided dies and sum the values up. If the lower bound
is not satisified the value will be set to the lower bound.
Additionally fighters, rangers and paladins throw two
(ordered) ten-sided die that determines that extra value on
the strength if it is set to 18. The extra strength value is
0 for non-fighters and for fighters the first roll modulo 10
times 10 plus the second roll modulo 10, if this adds up to
0, then the value is instead 100. The strength 18 with 100 as
the extra is displayed as 18/00. During the character
creation you can rearrange the values and reroll the dice
until you are satisfied.


@node Alignment
@section Alignment
@cindex charcter alignment
@cindex alignment, charcter

The character's alignment determines how he interacts with
his environment. If your character stray severely from his
alignment, there will be consequences, he may even loss
some abilities.

You character's alignment determines your parties starting
reputation.

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .80
@item  @bullet{}  Lawful good
@tab   12
@item  @bullet{}  Neutral good
@tab   11
@item  @bullet{}  Chaotic good
@tab   11
@item  @bullet{}  Lawful neutral
@tab   10
@item  @bullet{}  Neutral
@tab   10
@item  @bullet{}  Chaotic neutral
@tab   10
@item  @bullet{}  Lawful evil
@tab   9
@item  @bullet{}  Neutral evil
@tab   9
@item  @bullet{}  Chaotic evil
@tab   8
@end multitable


@node Weapon proficiencies
@section Weapon proficiencies
@cindex weapon proficiencies
@cindex proficiencies, weapon

Charaters receive weapon proficiencies, when wielding a
weapon the character receive a +1 damage bonus for each
proficiencies level on the wielded weapon. Additionally,
when wielding a weapon without for which the charater lack
a proficiency he receives a −1 damage penalty.

Level 1 fighters, rangers and paladins can assign four
proficiency points, at most two per weapon, other classes
can only assign two points, at most one per weapon. At level
 up a character can sometimes add another proficiency level.
Fighters can at most have 5 in proficiency levels on a
weapon, rangers and paladins can have at most 3, other
classes can atmost have 2 in proficiency levels.

The weapons you can become proficient in depends on which
class you have selected. But there are a total of eight
available proficiency.

@itemize @bullet
@item  Bow
@item  Spiked weapons
@item  Small swords
@item  Large swords
@item  Axe
@item  Blunt weapons
@item  Missile weapons
@item  Pole-arm
@end itemize


@node Thief abilities
@section Thief abilities
@cindex thief abilities

Thieves, both singleclassed and multiclassed, have four
special abilities.

@itemize @bullet
@item  Find traps (5)
(and move disarm them)
@item  Open locks (10)
@item  Pick pockets (15)
@item  Stealth (10)
(move silently/hide in shadows)
@end itemize

Thieves have 30 points allocated at the first level,
indicated by the brackets in the list above, and will
receive 20 additional points to allocate for each level,
including the first level. Rangers also have stealth, and
bards have pick pocket, 5 points per level, starting at 10
and limited to 99. A point is a 1 %-unit unit, that is
multiplied the 1D20 roll.

During stealth mode a character by be successful in
performing a backstab when attacking with melée weapons.
At level 1 to 4 backstab doubles the damage taked by the
target, 3 times at level 5 to 8, 4 times at level 9 to
12, and 5 times at level 13 and higher.

The scores can be modified by the character's race.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.39
@item @b{Race}
@tab  @b{Find traps}
@tab  @b{Open locks}
@tab  @b{Pick pockets}
@tab  @b{Stealth}
@item Dwarf     @tab +15  @tab +10  @tab 0    @tab 0
@item Elf       @tab 0    @tab −5   @tab +5   @tab +10
@item Gnome     @tab +10  @tab +5   @tab 0    @tab +5
@item Half-Elf  @tab 0    @tab 0    @tab +10  @tab +5
@item Halfling  @tab +5   @tab +5   @tab +5   @tab +15
@end multitable

The scores are also modified by the character's dexterity.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.39
@item @b{Dexterity}
@tab  @b{Find traps}
@tab  @b{Open locks}
@tab  @b{Pick pockets}
@tab  @b{Stealth}
@item 1      @tab −30  @tab −30  @tab −35  @tab −40
@item 2–3    @tab −25  @tab −25  @tab −30  @tab −35
@item 4–5    @tab −20  @tab −20  @tab −25  @tab −30
@item 6–7    @tab −15  @tab −15  @tab −20  @tab −25
@item 8–9    @tab −10  @tab −10  @tab −15  @tab −20
@item 10     @tab −10  @tab −5   @tab −10  @tab −15
@item 11     @tab −5   @tab 0    @tab −5   @tab −10
@item 12     @tab 0    @tab 0    @tab 0    @tab −5
@item 13–15  @tab 0    @tab 0    @tab 0    @tab 0
@item 16     @tab 0    @tab +5   @tab 0    @tab 0
@item 17     @tab 0    @tab +10  @tab +5   @tab +5
@item 18     @tab +5   @tab +15  @tab +10  @tab +10
@item 19     @tab +10  @tab +20  @tab +15  @tab +15
@item 20     @tab +15  @tab +25  @tab +20  @tab +18
@item 21     @tab +20  @tab +30  @tab +25  @tab +20
@item 22     @tab +25  @tab +35  @tab +30  @tab +23
@item 23     @tab +30  @tab +40  @tab +35  @tab +25
@item 24     @tab +35  @tab +45  @tab +40  @tab +30
@item 25     @tab +40  @tab +50  @tab +45  @tab +35
@end multitable


@node Spell book
@section Spell book
@cindex character spell book
@cindex spell book, character

If your character is a mage you will be able to choose two
1st-level wizard spells, sorcerers will choose 3 spells.
Druids and clerics do not choose spells, but have priest
spells. Rangers and paladins will be able to learn priest
spells at level 8 and 9 respectively, and bards will be able
to learn wizard spells at level 2.


@node Racial enemy
@section Racial enemy
@cindex racial enemy

Rangers choose a racial enemy. A ranger will receive a +4
bonus to his attack rolls when fighting creatures of the
selected type, but a −4 penalty when fighting other
creatures.


@node Colour
@section Colour
@cindex character colour
@cindex colour, character

When creating your chracter you will need to choose colour
used to on the players name. You can choose between red,
green, yellow, blue, magenta and cyan, the actual colour
depends on your terminal's palette on the colours 9 to 14.


@node Name
@section Name
@cindex character name
@cindex name, character

When creating your character you will need to name him.



@node Magic and specialist mages
@chapter Magic and specialist mages

@menu
* Specialist mages::           Specialist mages.
* Schools of magic::           Schools of magic.
* Spell properties::           Spell properties.
@end menu


@node Specialist mages
@section Specialist mages
@cindex schools of magic
@cindex magic, schools
@cindex specialist mages
@cindex mage, specialists

The specialist mage classes are alternative to regular mage
class, they can memorise one extra spell per spell level
that they can normally use. They can however not learn, but
they can use directly from scroll, spells in their
opposition schools. With the exception for gnomes,
specialist mages cannot be multiclassed, but they can be
dualclassed from, but not towards.

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Abjurer:} Specialises in protective magic.
@item @b{Conjurer:} Specialises in creating creatures and objects.
@item @b{Diviner:} Specialises in detection and divining magic.
@item @b{Enchanter:} Specialises in mind manipulation.
@item @b{Illusionist:} Specialises in creating illusions.
@item @b{Invoker:} Specialises in invocation magic.
@item @b{Necromancer:} Specialises in magic dealing with life and death.
@item @b{Transmuter:} Specialises in physical reality alteration.
@end itemize

Sorcerers, priests, rangers, paladins and bards cannot be
specialists.


@node Schools of magic
@section Schools of magic
@cindex schools of magic
@cindex magic, schools
@cindex specialist mages
@cindex mage, specialists

Magic spells falls into nine different schools of magic.

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Abjurtion:}
Spells specialised in protection.
@item @b{Conjuration:}
Spells that creates creatures and objects.
@item @b{Divination:}
Spells that enables mages to learn secrets, predict the
future and detect hidden artifacts.
@item @b{Enchantment:}
Spells that is used for mind manipulation.
@item @b{Illusion:}
Spells that deceive the senses or minds of others.
@item @b{Invocation:}
Spells channeling energy to create specific effects and
materials.
@item @b{Necromancy:}
Necromancy is a restrictive school, it deals with dead
things and restoring life.
@item @b{Alteration:}
Spells that alters the physical reality.
@end itemize

@multitable @columnfractions 0.17 0.18 0.23 0.42
@item @b{Specialist}
@tab  @b{School}
@tab  @b{Effect colouration}
@tab  @b{Opposition school}
@item Abjurer
@tab  abjuration
@tab  green
@tab  alteration
@item Transmuter
@tab  alteration
@tab  blue
@tab  abjuration, necromancy
@item Conjurer
@tab  conjuration
@tab  orange
@tab  divination
@item Diviner
@tab  divination
@tab  white/pearl
@tab  conjuration
@item Enchanter
@tab  enchantment
@tab  magenta
@tab  invocation
@item Illusionist
@tab  illusion
@tab  multicoloured
@tab  necromancy
@item Invoker
@tab  invocation
@tab  red
@tab  enchantment, conjuration
@item Necromancer
@tab  necromancy
@tab  ice/blue
@tab  illusion
@end multitable

Offensive spell are printed in red, defensive spell are
printed in blue, and information spell are printed in white.


@node Spell properties
@section Spell properties
@cindex spell properties

@table @b
@item Range
@cindex range
The distance from the caster at which the spell effect
occurs or begins, in metres. If the range is zero, it can
only be used ont the caster himself; ‘Touch’ can use the
spell on others if he can physically touch them, which
requires a sucessful hit roll. These two special ranges
can be combinded, meaning that either can be utilied,
this is denoted ‘0/Touch’.

@item Duration
@cindex duration
How long the spell's effect lasts, ‘0’ indicates that the
effect has no time span. Spells with duraction can be
negated sometimes by potions or other spells, usally Dispel
magic will do the trick. Some spells have a variable
duration indicated by a die roll notation; for example
‘2D4+1 rounds’ means that two four-sided dice are thrown
and that the sum of the eyes, added by 1, is the number of
round that the spell's effect will last.

@item Casting time
@cindex casting time
The number of tenths of a round that is needed for the
spellcaster to cast the spell.

@item Area of effect
@cindex area of effect
Specifies which targets are affect by the spell, this can
incluce groups of creatures, hostality and radius.

@item Saving throw
@cindex saving throw
Specifies whether the target is allowed a saving throw, and
what the effect of a successful save whould be. The effect
can either be ‘negate’ which nullifies the magic, or ‘half’
which divided the damage by 2. ‘None’ denotes that no save
is allowed.
@end table



@node Ability score effects
@chapter Ability score effects
@cindex ability score, effects
@cindex effects of ability score

@menu
* Strength scores::            Strength scores.
* Dexterity scores::           Dexterity scores.
* Constitution scores::        Constitution scores.
* Intelligence scores::        Intelligence scores.
* Wisdom scores::              Wisdom scores.
* Charisma scores::            Charisma scores.
@end menu


@node Strength scores
@section Strength scores
@cindex strength
@cindex hit adjustment
@cindex damage adjustment
@cindex weight carry limit
@cindex bashing

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.15 0.18 0.15 0.42
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{Hit bonus}
@tab  @b{Damage bonus}
@tab  @b{Carry limit}
@tab  @b{Bashing %}
@item  1        @tab −5  @tab −2   @tab 1,75   @tab 0
@item  2        @tab −5  @tab −2   @tab 2      @tab 1
@item  3        @tab −3  @tab −1   @tab 2,25   @tab 3
@item  4        @tab −2  @tab −1   @tab 6,75   @tab 4
@item  5        @tab −2  @tab −1   @tab 6,75   @tab 4
@item  6        @tab −1  @tab 0    @tab 13,5   @tab 6
@item  7        @tab −1  @tab 0    @tab 13,5   @tab 6
@item  8        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 22,5   @tab 8
@item  9        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 22,5   @tab 8
@item 10        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 31,5   @tab 10
@item 11        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 31,5   @tab 10
@item 12        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 40,5   @tab 12
@item 13        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 40,5   @tab 12
@item 14        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 45     @tab 14
@item 15        @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 45     @tab 14
@item 16        @tab 0   @tab +1   @tab 67,5   @tab 16
@item 17        @tab +1  @tab +1   @tab 67,5   @tab 18
@item 18        @tab +1  @tab +2   @tab 90     @tab 20
@item 18/01–50  @tab +1  @tab +3   @tab 99     @tab 25
@item 18/51–75  @tab +2  @tab +3   @tab 112,5  @tab 30
@item 18/76–90  @tab +2  @tab +4   @tab 126    @tab 35
@item 18/91–99  @tab +2  @tab +5   @tab 144    @tab 40
@item 18/00     @tab +3  @tab +6   @tab 180    @tab 45
@item 19        @tab +3  @tab +7   @tab 225    @tab 50
@item 20        @tab +3  @tab +8   @tab 270    @tab 55
@item 21        @tab +4  @tab +9   @tab 315    @tab 60
@item 22        @tab +4  @tab +10  @tab 360    @tab 65
@item 23        @tab +5  @tab +11  @tab 450    @tab 70
@item 24        @tab +6  @tab +12  @tab 540    @tab 75
@item 25        @tab +7  @tab +14  @tab 720    @tab 80
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Hit bonus}
Added to the attack roll durign combat, higher value
makes it easier to hit the target.
@item  @b{Damage bonus}
Added to the damage inflicted by a sucessful melée attack.
@item  @b{Carry limit}
How much weight a character can carry before being
encumbered. When you wear items other then weapons and
sheild, that is items not in your hands, their weight
effect is divided by two; but items in your hands'
weight effect is doubled.
@item  @b{Bashing}
The chance of a character being able to open a long using
brute force.
@end itemize



@node Dexterity scores
@section Dexterity scores
@cindex dexterity
@cindex missile attack adjustment
@cindex armour class adjustment

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.30 0.60
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{Missile attack bonus}
@tab  @b{Armour class bonus}
@item  1  @tab −3  @tab +6
@item  2  @tab −2  @tab +5
@item  3  @tab −1  @tab +4
@item  4  @tab 0   @tab +3
@item  5  @tab 0   @tab +2
@item  6  @tab 0   @tab +1
@item  7  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item  8  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 15  @tab 0   @tab −1
@item 16  @tab +1  @tab −2
@item 17  @tab +2  @tab −3
@item 18  @tab +2  @tab −4
@item 19  @tab +3  @tab −4
@item 20  @tab +3  @tab −4
@item 21  @tab +4  @tab −5
@item 22  @tab +4  @tab −5
@item 23  @tab +4  @tab −5
@item 24  @tab +5  @tab −6
@item 25  @tab +5  @tab −6
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Missile attack bonus}
Added to the hit roll when using a ranged weapon. This is the
same as attack bonus (@ref{Strength scores}), except it only
applies when using ranged weapons.
@item  @b{Armour class bonus}
Added to the characters amour class, the lower the better.
@end itemize


@node Constitution scores
@section Constitution scores
@cindex constitution
@cindex hit point adjustment
@cindex resurrect and raise
@cindex raise and resurrect

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.20 0.70
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{Hit point bonus}@footnote{Above +2 does only apply to warriors}
@tab  @b{Resurrectable %}
@item  1  @tab −2  @tab 40
@item  2  @tab −1  @tab 45
@item  3  @tab −1  @tab 50
@item  4  @tab −1  @tab 55
@item  5  @tab 0   @tab 60
@item  6  @tab 0   @tab 65
@item  7  @tab 0   @tab 70
@item  8  @tab 0   @tab 75
@item  9  @tab 0   @tab 80
@item 10  @tab 0   @tab 85
@item 11  @tab 0   @tab 90
@item 12  @tab 0   @tab 92
@item 13  @tab 0   @tab 94
@item 14  @tab 0   @tab 96
@item 15  @tab +1  @tab 98
@item 16  @tab +2  @tab 100
@item 17  @tab +3  @tab 100
@item 18  @tab +4  @tab 100
@item 19  @tab +5  @tab 100
@item 20  @tab +5  @tab 100
@item 21  @tab +6  @tab 100
@item 22  @tab +6  @tab 100
@item 23  @tab +6  @tab 100
@item 24  @tab +7  @tab 100
@item 25  @tab +7  @tab 100
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Hit point bonus}
Added to the hit point roll a character makes when leveling
up or when the character is created.
@item @b{Resurrectable}
The chance that a character will be successfully ressurected
or raised from the dead by magic. Priests at temples will
always be successful.
@end itemize


@node Intelligence scores
@section Intelligence scores
@cindex intelligence
@cindex spells
@cindex lore

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.19 0.17 0.20 0.34
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{Spell level limit}
@tab  @b{Spell learn %}
@tab  @b{@w{Maximum spell} count per level}
@tab  @b{Lore bonus}
@item  1  @tab 0th   @tab 0    @tab 0          @tab −30
@item  2  @tab 1st   @tab 1    @tab 0          @tab −30
@item  3  @tab 1st   @tab 5    @tab 1          @tab −20
@item  4  @tab 2nd   @tab 10   @tab 1          @tab −20
@item  5  @tab 2nd   @tab 15   @tab 2          @tab −20
@item  6  @tab 3rd   @tab 20   @tab 2          @tab −20
@item  7  @tab 3rd   @tab 25   @tab 4          @tab −10
@item  8  @tab 4th   @tab 30   @tab 4          @tab −10
@item  9  @tab 4th   @tab 35   @tab 6          @tab −10
@item 10  @tab 5th   @tab 40   @tab 7          @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 5th   @tab 45   @tab 7          @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 6th   @tab 50   @tab 7          @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 6th   @tab 55   @tab 9          @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 7th   @tab 60   @tab 9          @tab 0
@item 15  @tab 7th   @tab 65   @tab 11         @tab +3
@item 16  @tab 8th   @tab 70   @tab 11         @tab +5
@item 17  @tab 8th   @tab 75   @tab 14         @tab +7
@item 18  @tab 9th   @tab 85   @tab 18         @tab +10
@item 19  @tab 9th   @tab 95   @tab unlimited  @tab +12
@item 20  @tab 9th   @tab 96   @tab unlimited  @tab +15
@item 21  @tab 9th   @tab 97   @tab unlimited  @tab +20
@item 22  @tab 9th   @tab 98   @tab unlimited  @tab +25
@item 23  @tab 9th   @tab 99   @tab unlimited  @tab +30
@item 24  @tab 9th   @tab 100  @tab unlimited  @tab +35
@item 25  @tab 9th   @tab 100  @tab unlimited  @tab +40
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Spell level limit}
The highest level of spells a wizard can learn and use.
@item  @b{Spell learn}
The chance that a wizard can learn a spell and add it to
his spell book or cast from a scroll.
@item  @b{Maximum spell count per level}
The maximum number of spells a wizard can have in his spell
book for each spell level.
@item  @b{Lore bonus}
Added to the character lore, cumulative with the
lore bonus from the wisdom.
@end itemize


@node Wisdom scores
@section Wisdom scores
@cindex wisdom
@cindex magic defence
@cindex saving throws, magic
@cindex spells
@cindex lore

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.18 0.17 0.20 0.35
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{@w{Magic defence} bonus}
@tab  @b{Bonus spells}
@tab  @b{Spell Failure %}
@tab  @b{Lore bonus}
@item  1  @tab −5  @tab none      @tab 60  @tab −30
@item  2  @tab −4  @tab none      @tab 55  @tab −30
@item  3  @tab −3  @tab none      @tab 50  @tab −20
@item  4  @tab −2  @tab none      @tab 45  @tab −20
@item  5  @tab −1  @tab none      @tab 40  @tab −20
@item  6  @tab −1  @tab none      @tab 35  @tab −20
@item  7  @tab −1  @tab none      @tab 30  @tab −10
@item  8  @tab 0   @tab none      @tab 25  @tab −10
@item  9  @tab 0   @tab none      @tab 20  @tab −10
@item 10  @tab 0   @tab none      @tab 15  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 0   @tab none      @tab 10  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 0   @tab none      @tab 5   @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 0   @tab 1st       @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 0   @tab 1st       @tab 0   @tab 0
@item 15  @tab +1  @tab 2nd       @tab 0   @tab +3
@item 16  @tab +2  @tab 2nd       @tab 0   @tab +5
@item 17  @tab +3  @tab 3rd       @tab 0   @tab +7
@item 18  @tab +4  @tab 4th       @tab 0   @tab +10
@item 19  @tab +4  @tab 1st, 4th  @tab 0   @tab +12
@item 20  @tab +4  @tab 2nd, 4th  @tab 0   @tab +15
@item 21  @tab +4  @tab 3rd, 5th  @tab 0   @tab +20
@item 22  @tab +4  @tab 4th, 5th  @tab 0   @tab +25
@item 23  @tab +4  @tab 5th, 5th  @tab 0   @tab +30
@item 24  @tab +4  @tab 6th, 6th  @tab 0   @tab +35
@item 25  @tab +4  @tab 6th, 7th  @tab 0   @tab +40
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Magic defence bonus}
Added to the spell saving throw.
@item  @b{Bonus spells}
Additional spells a priest receives when the level is
normally accessable. If the characters wisdom is decreased
the slots is removed. The bonus spells are cumulative as
you move down the table.
@item  @b{Spell Failure}
The risk that a priest fails the cast a spell.
@item  @b{Lore bonus}
Added to the character lore, cumulative with the
lore bonus from the intelligence.
@end itemize


@node Charisma scores
@section Charisma scores
@cindex charisma
@cindex reaction adjustment

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.90
@item @b{Score}
@tab  @b{Reaction adjustment}
@item  1  @tab −7
@item  2  @tab −6
@item  3  @tab −5
@item  4  @tab −4
@item  5  @tab −3
@item  6  @tab −2
@item  7  @tab −1
@item  8  @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 0
@item 13  @tab +1
@item 14  @tab +2
@item 15  @tab +3
@item 16  @tab +4
@item 17  @tab +4
@item 18  @tab +5
@item 19  @tab +8
@item 20  @tab +9
@item 21  @tab +10
@item 22  @tab +11
@item 23  @tab +12
@item 24  @tab +13
@item 25  @tab +14
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Reaction adjustment}
Added to the reaction from non-player characters
and intelligent creatures.
@end itemize

For encounter reactions, the game master throws 1D4+8
and than applies modifiers. The results indicate the
reaction of the encounter to your party:

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{7–:}   Hostile reaction
@item  @b{8–14:} Neutral reaction
@item  @b{20+:}  Friendly reaction
@end itemize

Reactions from encountered non-player characters are
decidied by a 2D10 roll with modifiers based on the
leaders charisma and the party's reputation as well as
an internal modifier held by the non-player character,
primarily based on that characters alignment.



@node Miscellaneous attibutes
@chapter Miscellaneous attibutes
@cindex miscellaneous attibutes
@cindex attibutes, miscellaneous

@menu
* Detecting secret doors::     Detecting secret doors.
* Lore::                       Identifing items.
* Luck::                       Effects of luck.
* Specialisation::             Specialisation.
* Morale::                     Morale.
* Saving throws::              Saving throws.
@end menu


@node Detecting secret doors
@section Detecting secret doors
@cindex detecting secret doors
@cindex secret doors, detecting

At any time a character has a chance to detect sectret doors
depending on his class and race. Wizards have an 5 % chance,
15 % for thieves and 10 % for clerics and fighters, 0 % for
others. Elf get an additional 20 % chance, dwarfs get 10 %
and halflings get 5 %.

Thieves' chance increase by as much as their change to find
traps when their find traps ability is on.


@node Lore
@section Lore
@cindex lore

Item can be either identified or unidentified. Unidentified
item can be identified by priests at temples at monetary
cost, by using a identify spell or by examining the item
if it has a lore value equal to or lower than the examining
character's lore.

As characters gain levels they gain lore.

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Bards} gain 10 lore rating per level.
@item  @b{Thieves} gain 3 lore rating per level.
@item  @b{Wizards} gain 3 lore rating per level.
@item  @b{Others} gain 1 lore rating per level.
@end itemize


@node Luck
@section Luck
@cindex luck

By default character do not have any luck. Luck is a bonus
adjustment to attack rolls.


@node Specialisation
@section Specialisation
@cindex specialisation
@cindex weapon proficiency

Weapon proficiency bonues:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.15 0.19 0.58
@item @b{Level}
@tab  @b{Hit bonus}
@tab  @b{Damage bonus}
@tab  @b{Attack per round}@footnote{A half attack means
that the inflicated damage is divided by 2 and rounded down.}
@item 1  @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab 1
@item 2  @tab +1  @tab +2  @tab 3/2
@item 3  @tab +3  @tab +3  @tab 3/2
@item 4  @tab +3  @tab +4  @tab 3/2
@item 5  @tab +3  @tab +5  @tab 2
@end multitable

Warriors also gain an extra attack at level 7.


@node Morale
@section Morale
@cindex morale

Morale affects whether a creature fights or flees during a
battle. Creatures react differently to morale breaks and
have different breaking levels, some creatures use melée
attacks at high morale and ranged attacks at low morale.

Morale is positively influenced by having a charismatic
leader, the leader himself however is not influensed by
this. Morale is negatively influenced by having seeing
morale break in the party, especially from the leader,
and by seeing a party member killed or knocked unconscious.
In some cases morale is negatively influenced by spotting
a difficult foe.


@node Saving throws
@section Saving throws
@cindex saving throws

Saving throws measures a character's resistance to different
types of attacks. The chance of making a successful saving
throw improves as the character increases in level; it can
also be improved by protection spells. A saving throw may
reduce damage or prevent the effect of an attack entirely.

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Save versus breath weapon:}
Used when facing monsters with breath weapons,
particularly the powerful blast of a dragon.
@item  @b{Save versus death magic, paralyzation, or poison:}
Used when a character is affected by a paralyzing attack,
poison or magic that otherwise kill the character outright.
@item  @b{Save versus petrification or polymorph:}
Used when a character is petrified or polymorphed.
@item  @b{Save versus rod, staff, or wand:}
Provided that another save of higher priority is not used,
this is used when affected by magical rods, staffs or wands.
@item  @b{Save versus spell:}
Provided that no other saving throw is specified, this is
used when a character attempts to resist the effects of
magic or attacks that cannot be classified in any other way.
@end itemize



@node Special abilities
@chapter Special abilities
@cindex special abilities
@cindex abilities, special

@menu
* Bard song::                  Bard song.
* Druidic shape change::       Druidic shape change.
* Infravision::                Infravision.
* Lay on hands::               Lay on hands.
* Protection from evil::       Protection from evil.
* Turning undead::             Turning undead.
@end menu


@node Bard song
@section Bard song
@cindex bard song

Bards can play songs which do do nothing except moving.
Bard's songs increases the parties luck and morale.


@node Druidic shape change
@section Druidic shape change
@cindex druidic shape change
@cindex shape change, druidic

Level 8 and higher druids can transform into three different
animals, each once per day. Druids can transform into brown
bear, black bear, or wolf, perhaps with increased hit point,
movement rate and damage.


@node Infravision
@section Infravision
@cindex infravision

Infravision allows you to see heat and hence warm blooded
creatures in the dark more clearly. Undead or cold blooded
creatures are not affected by infravision.


@node Lay on hands
@section Lay on hands
@cindex lay on hands

Paladins can heal themself and others by laying their hands
upon the target to heal. The target is healed by 2 hit
points per experience level of the healer. Paladins can
use this ability once per sleep.


@node Protection from evil
@section Protection from evil
@cindex Protection from evil

This spell create a 0,3 m radius magical barrier around the
recipient, that moves with the recipient.

All attackes made by evil and evilly enchanted creatures
agains the protected character receive a penalty of −2 to
each attack roll. Additionally any saving throws made by
the protected character caused by such attacks receive a
+2 bonus.


@node Turning undead
@section Turning undead
@cindex turning undead
@cindex undead, turning

Clerics and paladins have the ability to turn undead. This
ability lets the deity manifest a portion of its power
through a mortal vessel that does not assure sucess.
Evil undead creatures can lose morale and run away. If the
deity's power is channeled through a good aligned clerics,
the undead can be destroyed outright. Evil clerics can
somtimes gain control over the undead.



@node Character actions
@chapter Character actions
@cindex character actions
@cindex actions

@menu
* Effects of fatigue::         Effects of fatigue.
* Effects of encumbrance::     Effects of encumbrance.
* Effects of intoxication::    Effects of intoxication.
* Effects of reputation::      Effects of reputation.
* Effects of alignment::       Effects of alignment.
* Reaction adjustments::       Reaction adjustments.
@end menu


@node Effects of fatigue
@section Effects of fatigue
@cindex effects of fatigue
@cindex fatigue

A character can continue to operate at peak efficiency for
24 hours game time, after which the character receieves a
−1 luck penalty evety fourth hour. −1 luck means that every
roll (die) value is decrease by one, the value can however
not go below 1. If a character do not spell for five days
he may at any time fall unconscious.

As soon as the character has rested for 8 hours all
penalties will be removed, spells will be rememorised.
During spell the character will heal, the heal rate can be
increased by renting a room at an in, the higher quality
the grater the rate will be.


@node Effects of encumbrance
@section Effects of encumbrance
@cindex effects of encumbrance
@cindex encumbrance

How much a character can carry depends on the characters
strength. If this limit is exceeded the character will move
at half rate, positive speed effects from magic and items
will be not have any effect while a character is encumbered.
If the limit is exceeded too much the character will not
be able to move at all.


@node Effects of intoxication
@section Effects of intoxication
@cindex effects of intoxication
@cindex intoxication

Inns serve a variety of intoxicants; drinking to excess will
impair yout combat skill but improve your morale. The effects
of intoxicants wear off by time. Your morale is increased as
much as your luck is decreased when drinking.

The about you can drink before becoming intoxicated depends
on your constitution. Characters with 3 or less in constitution
will find them self drunk after one pony.


@node Effects of reputation
@section Effects of reputation
@cindex effects of reputation
@cindex reputation, effects

The party has a reputation, between 1 and 20. Your
reputation influences how you are preceived by non-player
characters, based on that non-player character's alignment.
Warning,  evil-doers may be come targets for guards and
bounty hunters.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.14 0.23 0.21 0.21 0.21
@item  @b{Reputation}
@tab   @b{Percentage cost of item from base cost}
@tab   @b{@w{Reaction from} good aligned}
@tab   @b{@w{Reaction from} neutral aligned}
@tab   @b{@w{Reaction from} evil aligned}
@item 20  @tab  50 %  @tab Happy    @tab Unhappy  @tab Break
@item 19  @tab  60 %  @tab Happy    @tab Unhappy  @tab Break
@item 18  @tab  70 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Angry
@item 17  @tab  80 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Angry
@item 16  @tab  90 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Angry
@item 15  @tab  90 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Unhappy
@item 14  @tab 100 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Unhappy
@item 13  @tab 100 %  @tab Happy    @tab Neutral  @tab Unhappy
@item 12  @tab 100 %  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item 11  @tab 100 %  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item 10  @tab 100 %  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item  9  @tab 110 %  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item  8  @tab 120 %  @tab Unhappy  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item  7  @tab 120 %  @tab Unhappy  @tab Neutral  @tab Neutral
@item  6  @tab 130 %  @tab Unhappy  @tab Neutral  @tab Happy
@item  5  @tab 140 %  @tab Angry    @tab Unhappy  @tab Happy
@item  4  @tab 150 %  @tab Angry    @tab Unhappy  @tab Happy
@item  3  @tab 200 %  @tab Angry    @tab Angry    @tab Happy
@item 2
@tab  Stores will not sell.
@tab  Break
@tab  Angry
@tab  Happy
@item 1
@tab  Stores will not sell.
@tab  Break
@tab  Break
@tab  Happy
@end multitable


@multitable @columnfractions 0.14 0.17 0.17 0.15 0.17 0.20
@item  @b{Reputation}
@tab   @b{@w{Killing an} innocent}
@tab   @b{@w{Injuring an} innocent}
@tab   @b{Stealing}
@tab   @b{@w{Killing a} guard}
@tab   @b{Donation needed}
@item 20  @tab −10  @tab -2  @tab −1  @tab −10  @tab ---
@item 19  @tab −10  @tab -2  @tab −1  @tab −10  @tab ---
@item 18  @tab −9   @tab -2  @tab −1  @tab −9   @tab ---
@item 17  @tab −8   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −9   @tab 5000
@item 16  @tab −7   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −9   @tab 2500
@item 15  @tab −6   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −8   @tab 2000
@item 14  @tab −5   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −8   @tab 1500
@item 13  @tab −5   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −7   @tab 1200
@item 12  @tab −5   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −7   @tab 900
@item 11  @tab −4   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −6   @tab 700
@item 10  @tab −4   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −6   @tab 500
@item 9   @tab −3   @tab -1  @tab −1  @tab −5   @tab 400
@item 8   @tab −2   @tab -1  @tab 0   @tab −5   @tab 300
@item 7   @tab −2   @tab -1  @tab 0   @tab −4   @tab 200
@item 6   @tab −2   @tab -1  @tab 0   @tab −3   @tab 400
@item 5   @tab −2   @tab -1  @tab 0   @tab −2   @tab 500
@item 4   @tab −1   @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab −2   @tab 1000
@item 3   @tab −1   @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab −1   @tab 1000
@item 2   @tab −1   @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab −1   @tab 1200
@item 1   @tab 0    @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab 0    @tab 1500
@end multitable


@node Effects of alignment
@section Effects of alignment
@cindex effects of alignment
@cindex alignment, effects

If you reputation of your party falls below 6, the paladins
your your party loses their status as paladins. At
reputation level 4, rangers loss the there abilities.
Paladins and rangers that fall below their acceptable
reputation level become fighters cannot regain their status.


@node Reaction adjustments
@section Reaction adjustments
@cindex reaction adjustments

@multitable @columnfractions 0.14 0.20 0.66
@item  @b{Reputation}
@tab   @b{Adjustment}
@tab   @b{Effect}
@item  20     @tab   +4     @tab   ---
@item  18–19  @tab   +3     @tab   ---
@item  16–17  @tab   +2     @tab   ---
@item  14–15  @tab   +1     @tab   ---
@item  8–13   @tab   None   @tab   ---
@item  7      @tab   −1     @tab   ---
@item  6      @tab   −2     @tab   ---
@item  5      @tab   −3
@tab   Whenever the party enters a new area guards
       attacking the party will be spawned
@item  4      @tab   −4
@tab   Whenever the party enters a new area guards
       attacking the party will be spawned
@item  3      @tab   −5
@tab   Whenever the party enters a new area guards
       attacking the party will be spawned
@item  2      @tab   −6
@tab   Whenever the party enters a new area guards
       attacking the party will be spawned
@item  1      @tab   −7
@tab   Whenever the party enters a new area guards
       attacking the party will be spawned
@end multitable



@node Armour
@chapter Armour
@cindex armour

@menu
* Armour vs weapon types::     Armour versus weapon types.
* Armour types::               Armour types.
* Headgear::                   About headgear.
@end menu


@node Armour vs weapon types
@section Armour vs weapon types
@cindex armour versus weapon types
@cindex weapon types

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.15 0.15 0.50
@item @b{Armour}    @tab @b{Slashing}
@tab  @b{Piercing}  @tab @b{Bludgeoning}
@item Robe              @tab 0   @tab 0   @tab 0
@item Leather armour    @tab 0   @tab +2  @tab 0
@item Studded leather   @tab −2  @tab −1  @tab 0
@item Chain mail        @tab −2  @tab 0   @tab +2
@item Splint mail       @tab 0   @tab −1  @tab −2
@item Plate mail        @tab −3  @tab 0   @tab 0
@item Full plate mail   @tab −4  @tab −3  @tab 0
@end multitable


@node Armour types
@section Armour types
@cindex armour types
@cindex shields

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.20 0.60
@item @b{Armour}
@tab @b{Armour Class}
@tab @b{Usable by}
@item Buckler           @tab −1 modifier  @tab not wizard
@item Small shield      @tab −1 modifier  @tab not wizard
@item Medium shield     @tab −1 modifier  @tab F,R,P,C
@item Large shield      @tab −1 modifier  @tab F,R,P,C
@item Robe              @tab none         @tab M,S
@item Leather armour    @tab 8            @tab not wizard
@item Studded leather   @tab 7            @tab not wizard
@item Chain mail        @tab 5            @tab F,R,P,B,C
@item Splint mail       @tab 4            @tab F,R,P,C
@item Plate mail        @tab 3            @tab F,R,P,C
@item Full plate mail   @tab 1            @tab F,R,P,C
@end multitable

However bucklers does not protect against missile and
piercing weapons, small shields does not protect against
missile weapons, and large shield adds an additional −2
against missile weapons.


@node Headgear
@section Headgear
@cindex headgear
@cindex hoods
@cindex helmets
@cindex hats

There are three different types of head gear.

@itemize @bullet
@item  @b{Helmets}
are not wearable by rogues and wizards,
they protect against critical hits.
@item  @b{Hoods}
are not wearable by wizards, but have no
neutral protection.
@item  @b{Hats}
are only wearable by wizards, but have no
neutral protection.
@end itemize



@node Weapons
@chapter Weapons

@menu
* Melée weapons::              About melée weapons.
* Ranged weapons::             About ranged weapons.
@end menu


@node Melée weapons
@section Melée weapons
@cindex melée weapons
@cindex weapons, melée

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.10 0.10 0.17 0.15 0.28
@item  @b{Weapon}@footnote{Includes ammunition and throwing weapons}
@tab   @b{Hands}
@tab   @b{Type}@footnote{b = bludgeoning, p = piercing, s = slashing}
@tab   @b{Speed factor}
@tab   @b{Damage}
@tab   @b{Usable by}
@item Arrow             @tab ---  @tab p    @tab ---
                        @tab 1D6       @tab F,R,P,T,B
@item Bastard sword     @tab 1    @tab s    @tab 8
                        @tab 2D4       @tab F,R,P,B
@item Battle axe        @tab 1    @tab s    @tab 7
                        @tab 1D8       @tab F,R,P,B
@item Bolt              @tab ---  @tab p    @tab ---
                        @tab 1D10      @tab F,R,P,B
@item Bullet            @tab ---  @tab b    @tab ---
                        @tab 1D4+1     @tab all
@item Dagger            @tab 1    @tab p    @tab 2
                        @tab 1D4       @tab not cleric
@item Dart              @tab 1    @tab p    @tab 2
                        @tab 1D3       @tab not cleric
@item Club              @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D6       @tab not wizard
@item Flail             @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 7
                        @tab 1D6+1     @tab F,R,P,B,C
@item Halberd           @tab 2    @tab p/s  @tab 9
                        @tab 1D10      @tab F,R,P,B
@item Hand-to-hand      @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D2       @tab any
@item Hand-to-hand      @tab 2    @tab b    @tab 2
                        @tab 2D2       @tab any
@item Long sword        @tab 1    @tab s    @tab 5
                        @tab 1D8       @tab F,R,P,T,B
@item Mace              @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 7
                        @tab 1D6+1     @tab F,R,P,B,C
@item Morning star      @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 7
                        @tab 2D4       @tab F,R,P,B,C
@item Short sword       @tab 1    @tab s    @tab 3
                        @tab 1D6       @tab F,R,P,T,B
@item Spear             @tab 2    @tab p    @tab 6
                        @tab 1D4       @tab F,R,P,B,D
@item Throwing axe      @tab 1    @tab s    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D6       @tab F,R,P,B
@item Throwing dagger   @tab 1    @tab p    @tab 2
                        @tab 1D4       @tab not cleric
@item Torch             @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D2@footnote{Torches also have +1 fire.}
                        @tab all
@item Two-handed sword  @tab 2    @tab s    @tab 10
                        @tab 1D10      @tab F,R,P,B
@item War hammer        @tab 1    @tab b    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D4+1     @tab F,R,P,B
@item Quarterstaff      @tab 2    @tab b    @tab 4
                        @tab 1D6       @tab all
@end multitable

Melée weapons other than dagger, flail and hand-to-hand have
have a +1 armour class against melée bonus.


@node Ranged weapons
@section Ranged weapons
@cindex ranged weapons
@cindex weapons, ranged

@multitable @columnfractions 0.22 0.10 0.12 0.10 0.10 0.13 0.23
@item  @b{Weapon}@footnote{Throwing weapons are also included in melée weapons}
@tab   @b{Hands}
@tab   @b{@w{Rate of} fire}@footnote{This is the number of
       times per combat round that the weapon can be used.}
@tab   @b{Speed factor}
@tab   @b{Hit bonus}
@tab   @b{Damage bonus}
@tab   @b{Usable by}
@item Composite long bow  @tab 2   @tab 2  @tab 7   @tab +1
                          @tab +2  @tab F,R,P
@item Dart                @tab 1   @tab 3  @tab 2   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab not cleric
@item Heavy crossbow      @tab 2   @tab 1  @tab 10  @tab 0
                          @tab +2  @tab F,R,P,B
@item Light crossbow      @tab 2   @tab 1  @tab 7   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab F,R,P,B
@item Long bow            @tab 2   @tab 2  @tab 8   @tab +1
                          @tab 0   @tab F,R,P,B
@item Short bow           @tab 2   @tab 2  @tab 6   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab F,R,P,T,B
@item Sling               @tab 1   @tab 1  @tab 6   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab all
@item Throwing axe        @tab 1   @tab 1  @tab 4   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab F,R,P
@item Throwing dagger     @tab 1   @tab 2  @tab 2   @tab 0
                          @tab 0   @tab not priest
@end multitable



@node Elements
@chapter Elements
@cindex elements

Attacks have elementals attributes, not just physical.

@table @b
@item fire
Some fire spells and effects have a change of putting a
creature in panic mode, and may keep burning for a short
time.
@item cold
Some cold spells and effects may slow down a creature.
@item lightning
Lightning is not very special, although acid and poison is
more common, it is less common than fire and cold, and it
usally inflicts grater damage.
@item acid
Similar to poison, but it cannot be neutralised or slowed
with poison neutralisation and slowing magic. It usally
last for a much shorter peroid.
@item poison
See @ref{Effects of poison}.
@end table



@node Experience charts
@chapter Experience charts

@menu
* Warrior levels::             Warrior levels.
* Rogue levels::               Rogue levels.
* Wizard levels::              Wizard levels.
* Priest levels::              Priest levels.
@end menu


@node Warrior levels
@section Warrior levels
@cindex warrior experience chart
@cindex warrior level chart
@cindex fighter experience chart
@cindex fighter level chart
@cindex ranger experience chart
@cindex ranger level chart
@cindex paladin experience chart
@cindex paladin level chart
@cindex experience chart, warrior
@cindex level chart, warrior

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.30 0.30 0.30
@item @b{Level}
@tab  @b{Fighter}
@tab  @b{Ranger/Paladin}
@tab  @b{Hit dice (D10)}
@item  1  @tab         0  @tab         0  @tab 1
@item  2  @tab     2'000  @tab     2'250  @tab 2
@item  3  @tab     4'000  @tab     4'500  @tab 3
@item  4  @tab     8'000  @tab     9'000  @tab 4
@item  5  @tab    16'000  @tab    18'000  @tab 5
@item  6  @tab    32'000  @tab    36'000  @tab 6
@item  7  @tab    64'000  @tab    75'000  @tab 7
@item  8  @tab   125'000  @tab   150'000  @tab 8
@item  9  @tab   250'000  @tab   300'000  @tab 9
@item 10  @tab   500'000  @tab   600'000  @tab 9+3
@item 11  @tab   750'000  @tab   900'000  @tab 9+6
@item 12  @tab 1'000'000  @tab 1'200'000  @tab 9+9
@item 13  @tab 1'250'000  @tab 1'500'000  @tab 9+12
@item 14  @tab 1'500'000  @tab 1'800'000  @tab 9+15
@item 15  @tab 1'750'000  @tab 2'100'000  @tab 9+18
@item 16  @tab 2'000'000  @tab 2'400'000  @tab 9+21
@item 17  @tab 2'250'000  @tab 2'700'000  @tab 9+24
@item 18  @tab 2'500'000  @tab 3'000'000  @tab 9+27
@item 19  @tab 2'750'000  @tab 3'300'000  @tab 9+30
@item 20  @tab 3'000'000  @tab 3'600'000  @tab 9+33
@item 21  @tab 3'250'000  @tab 3'900'000  @tab 9+36
@item 22  @tab 3'500'000  @tab 4'200'000  @tab 9+39
@item 23  @tab 3'750'000  @tab 4'500'000  @tab 9+42
@item 24  @tab 4'000'000  @tab 4'800'000  @tab 9+45
@item 25  @tab 4'250'000  @tab 5'100'000  @tab 9+48
@item 26  @tab 4'500'000  @tab 5'400'000  @tab 9+51
@item 27  @tab 4'750'000  @tab 5'700'000  @tab 9+54
@item 28  @tab 5'000'000  @tab 6'000'000  @tab 9+57
@item 29  @tab 5'250'000  @tab 6'300'000  @tab 9+60
@item 30  @tab 5'500'000  @tab 6'600'000  @tab 9+63
@end multitable


@node Rogue levels
@section Rogue levels
@cindex rogue experience chart
@cindex rogue level chart
@cindex thief experience chart
@cindex thief level chart
@cindex bard experience chart
@cindex bard level chart
@cindex experience chart, rogue
@cindex level chart, rogue

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.30 0.60
@item @b{Level}
@tab  @b{Thief/Bard}
@tab  @b{Hit dice (D6)}
@item  1  @tab         0  @tab 1
@item  2  @tab     1'250  @tab 2
@item  3  @tab     2'500  @tab 3
@item  4  @tab     5'000  @tab 4
@item  5  @tab    10'000  @tab 5
@item  6  @tab    20'000  @tab 6
@item  7  @tab    40'000  @tab 7
@item  8  @tab    70'000  @tab 8
@item  9  @tab   110'000  @tab 9
@item 10  @tab   160'000  @tab 10
@item 11  @tab   220'000  @tab 10+2
@item 12  @tab   440'000  @tab 10+4
@item 13  @tab   660'000  @tab 10+6
@item 14  @tab   880'000  @tab 10+8
@item 15  @tab 1'100'000  @tab 10+10
@item 16  @tab 1'320'000  @tab 10+12
@item 17  @tab 1'540'000  @tab 10+14
@item 18  @tab 1'760'000  @tab 10+16
@item 19  @tab 1'980'000  @tab 10+18
@item 20  @tab 2'200'000  @tab 10+20
@item 21  @tab 2'420'000  @tab 10+22
@item 22  @tab 2'640'000  @tab 10+24
@item 23  @tab 2'860'000  @tab 10+26
@item 24  @tab 3'080'000  @tab 10+27
@item 25  @tab 3'300'000  @tab 10+39
@item 26  @tab 3'520'000  @tab 10+32
@item 27  @tab 3'740'000  @tab 10+34
@item 28  @tab 3'960'000  @tab 10+36
@item 29  @tab 4'180'000  @tab 10+38
@item 30  @tab 4'400'000  @tab 10+40
@end multitable


@node Wizard levels
@section Wizard levels
@cindex wizard experience chart
@cindex wizard level chart
@cindex mage experience chart
@cindex mage level chart
@cindex sorcerer experience chart
@cindex sorcerer level chart
@cindex experience chart, wizard
@cindex level chart, wizard

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.30 0.60
@item @b{Level}
@tab  @b{Mage/Sorcerer}
@tab  @b{Hit dice (D4)}
@item  1  @tab         0  @tab 1
@item  2  @tab     2'500  @tab 2
@item  3  @tab     5'000  @tab 3
@item  4  @tab    10'000  @tab 4
@item  5  @tab    20'000  @tab 5
@item  6  @tab    40'000  @tab 6
@item  7  @tab    60'000  @tab 7
@item  8  @tab    90'000  @tab 8
@item  9  @tab   135'000  @tab 9
@item 10  @tab   250'000  @tab 10
@item 11  @tab   375'000  @tab 10+1
@item 12  @tab   750'000  @tab 10+2
@item 13  @tab 1'125'000  @tab 10+3
@item 14  @tab 1'500'000  @tab 10+4
@item 15  @tab 1'875'000  @tab 10+5
@item 16  @tab 2'250'000  @tab 10+6
@item 17  @tab 2'625'000  @tab 10+7
@item 18  @tab 3'000'000  @tab 10+8
@item 19  @tab 3'375'000  @tab 10+9
@item 20  @tab 3'750'000  @tab 10+10
@item 21  @tab 4'125'000  @tab 10+11
@item 22  @tab 4'500'000  @tab 10+12
@item 23  @tab 4'875'000  @tab 10+13
@item 24  @tab 5'250'000  @tab 10+14
@item 25  @tab 5'625'000  @tab 10+15
@item 26  @tab 6'000'000  @tab 10+16
@item 27  @tab 6'375'000  @tab 10+17
@item 28  @tab 6'750'000  @tab 10+18
@item 29  @tab 7'125'000  @tab 10+19
@item 30  @tab 7'500'000  @tab 10+20
@end multitable


@node Priest levels
@section Priest levels
@cindex priest experience chart
@cindex priest level chart
@cindex cleric experience chart
@cindex cleric level chart
@cindex druid experience chart
@cindex druid level chart
@cindex experience chart, priest
@cindex level chart, priest

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.30 0.30 0.30
@item @b{Level}
@tab  @b{Cleric}
@tab  @b{Druid}
@tab  @b{Hit dice (D10)}
@item  1  @tab         0  @tab         0  @tab 1
@item  2  @tab     1'500  @tab     2'000  @tab 2
@item  3  @tab     3'000  @tab     4'000  @tab 3
@item  4  @tab     6'000  @tab     7'500  @tab 4
@item  5  @tab    13'000  @tab    12'500  @tab 5
@item  6  @tab    27'500  @tab    20'000  @tab 6
@item  7  @tab    55'000  @tab    35'000  @tab 7
@item  8  @tab   110'000  @tab    60'000  @tab 8
@item  9  @tab   225'000  @tab    90'000  @tab 9
@item 10  @tab   450'000  @tab   125'000  @tab 9+2
@item 11  @tab   675'000  @tab   200'000  @tab 9+4
@item 12  @tab   900'000  @tab   300'000  @tab 9+6
@item 13  @tab 1'125'000  @tab   750'000  @tab 9+8
@item 14  @tab 1'350'000  @tab 1'500'000  @tab 9+10
@item 15  @tab 1'575'000  @tab 1'800'000  @tab 9+12
@item 16  @tab 1'800'000  @tab 2'025'000  @tab 9+14
@item 17  @tab 2'025'000  @tab 2'250'000  @tab 9+16
@item 18  @tab 2'250'000  @tab 2'475'000  @tab 9+18
@item 19  @tab 2'475'000  @tab 2'700'000  @tab 9+20
@item 20  @tab 2'700'000  @tab 2'925'000  @tab 9+22
@item 21  @tab 2'925'000  @tab 3'150'000  @tab 9+24
@item 22  @tab 3'150'000  @tab 3'375'000  @tab 9+26
@item 23  @tab 3'375'000  @tab 3'600'000  @tab 9+28
@item 24  @tab 3'600'000  @tab 3'825'000  @tab 9+30
@item 25  @tab 3'825'000  @tab 4'050'000  @tab 9+32
@item 26  @tab 4'050'000  @tab 4'275'000  @tab 9+34
@item 27  @tab 4'275'000  @tab 4'500'000  @tab 9+36
@item 28  @tab 4'500'000  @tab 4'725'000  @tab 9+38
@item 29  @tab 4'725'000  @tab 4'950'000  @tab 9+40
@item 30  @tab 4'950'000  @tab 5'175'000  @tab 9+42
@end multitable



@node Spell progression
@chapter Spell progression
@cindex spell progression

@menu
* Ranger spell progression::   Ranger spell progression.
* Paladin spell progression::  Paladin spell progression.
* Bard spell progression::     Bard spell progression.
* Priest spell progression::   Priest spell progression.
* Wizard spell progression::   Wizard spell progression.
@end menu


@node Ranger spell progression
@section Ranger spell progression
@cindex ranger spell progression
@cindex spell progression, ranger

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
@item @b{Ranger level}
@tab  @b{Casting level}
@tab  @b{Spell level 1}
@tab  @b{Spell level 2}
@tab  @b{Spell level 3}
@item  8  @tab 1  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 5  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 13  @tab 6  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 14  @tab 7  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 2
@item 15  @tab 8  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 16  @tab 9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3
@end multitable

Rangers cannot be progress spells beyond level 16.


@node Paladin spell progression
@section Paladin spell progression
@cindex paladin spell progression
@cindex spell progression, paladin

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
@item @b{Paladin level}
@tab  @b{Casting level}
@tab  @b{Spell level 1}
@tab  @b{Spell level 2}
@tab  @b{Spell level 3}
@tab  @b{Spell level 4}
@item  9  @tab 1  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 5  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 6  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 15  @tab 7  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 1
@item 16  @tab 8  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 17  @tab 9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 18  @tab 9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 19  @tab 9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 20  @tab 9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3
@end multitable

Paladin cannot be progress spells beyond level 20.


@node Bard spell progression
@section Bard spell progression
@cindex bard spell progression
@cindex spell progression, bard

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.12
@item @b{Bard level}
@tab  @b{Casting level}
@tab  @b{Spell level 1}
@tab  @b{Spell level 2}
@tab  @b{Spell level 3}
@tab  @b{Spell level 4}
@tab  @b{Spell level 5}
@tab  @b{Spell level 6}
@item  2  @tab 1  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  3  @tab 1  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  4  @tab 1  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  5  @tab 2  @tab 3  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  6  @tab 2  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  7  @tab 2  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  8  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 15  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0
@item 16  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 17  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 18  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 19  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 20  @tab 7  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3
@item 21  @tab 7  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3
@item 22  @tab 7  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3
@item 23  @tab 8  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4
@end multitable

Bards cannot be progress spells beyond level 23.


@node Priest spell progression
@section Priest spell progression
@cindex priest spell progression
@cindex cleric spell progression
@cindex druid spell progression
@cindex spell progression, priest

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.12 0.12
@item @b{Priest level}@footnote{The casting level is the same as the priest level}
@tab  @b{Spell level 1}
@tab  @b{Spell level 2}
@tab  @b{Spell level 3}
@tab  @b{Spell level 4}
@tab  @b{Spell level 5}
@tab  @b{Spell level 6}@footnote{Requires 17 or higher wisdom}
@tab  @b{Spell level 7}@footnote{Requires 18 or higher wisdom}
@item  1  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  6  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  7  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  8  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 15  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 16  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 17  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 18  @tab 8  @tab 8  @tab 8  @tab 8  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 2
@item 19  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 6  @tab 4  @tab 2
@item 20  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 5  @tab 2
@item 21  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 6  @tab 2
@item 22  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 6  @tab 3
@item 23  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 7  @tab 3
@item 24  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 3
@item 25  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 4
@item 26  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 4
@item 27  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 5
@item 28  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 6
@item 29  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 7
@item 30  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 9  @tab 8

@end multitable


@node Wizard spell progression
@section Wizard spell progression
@cindex wizard spell progression
@cindex mage spell progression
@cindex sorcerer spell progression
@cindex spell progression, wizard

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
@item @b{Wizard level}@footnote{The casting level is the same as the wizard level}
@tab  @b{Spell level 1}
@tab  @b{Spell level 2}
@tab  @b{Spell level 3}
@tab  @b{Spell level 4}
@tab  @b{Spell level 5}
@tab  @b{Spell level 6}
@tab  @b{Spell level 7}
@tab  @b{Spell level 8}
@tab  @b{Spell level 9}
@item  1  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  5  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  6  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  7  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  8  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item  9  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 10  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 11  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 12  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 13  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 0  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 14  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 15  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0  @tab 0
@item 16  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1  @tab 0
@item 17  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 0
@item 18  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 2  @tab 1
@item 19  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 20  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 21  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 22  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 4  @tab 3  @tab 1
@item 23  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3  @tab 2
@item 24  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 4  @tab 2
@item 25  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 2
@item 26  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3
@item 27  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 5  @tab 5  @tab 3
@item 28  @tab 8  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 3
@item 29  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 4
@item 30  @tab 9  @tab 8  @tab 8  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 7  @tab 6  @tab 6  @tab 4
@end multitable

Wizards starts with 2 cantrips (level 0 spells) and gain 1 every other level up.



@node New spell charts
@chapter New spell charts
@cindex spell book

Here follows charts with the spells and number of selectable
spells for characters when they level up. Fighter, thief and
mage does not learn spells at level up and is thus excluded.

@menu
* Sorcerer spell chart::       Sorcerer spell chart.
* Ranger spell chart::         Ranger spell chart.
* Paladin spell chart::        Paladin spell chart.
* Bard spell chart::           Bard spell chart.
* Cleric spell chart::         Cleric spell chart.
* Druid spell chart::          Druid spell chart.
@end menu


@node Sorcerer spell chart
@section Sorcerer spell chart
@cindex sorcerer spell book
@cindex spell book, sorcerer

Number of selectable wizard spells for sorcerer at level up
at each spell level.

@c TODO fill table
@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06
@item @b{Level} @tab @b{1} @tab @b{2} @tab @b{3} @tab @b{4}
@tab @b{5} @tab @b{6} @tab @b{7} @tab @b{8} @tab @b{9}
@item  1
@item  2
@item  3
@item  4
@item  5
@item  6
@item  7
@item  8
@item  9
@item 10
@item 11
@item 12
@item 13
@item 14
@item 15
@item 16
@item 17
@item 18
@item 19
@item 20
@item 21
@item 22
@item 23
@item 24
@item 25
@item 26
@item 27
@item 28
@item 29
@item 30
@end multitable


@node Ranger spell chart
@section Ranger spell chart
@cindex ranger spell book
@cindex spell book, ranger

@c TODO fill table
@table @b
@item Level  8
-
@item Level  9
-
@item Level 10
-
@item Level 11
-
@item Level 12
-
@item Level 13
-
@item Level 14
-
@item Level 15
-
@item Level 16
-
@item Level 17
-
@item Level 18
-
@item Level 19
-
@item Level 20
-
@item Level 21
-
@item Level 22
-
@item Level 23
-
@item Level 24
-
@item Level 25
-
@item Level 26
-
@item Level 27
-
@item Level 28
-
@item Level 29
-
@item Level 30
-
@end table


@node Paladin spell chart
@section Paladin spell chart
@cindex paladin spell book
@cindex spell book, paladin

@c TODO fill table
@table @b
@item Level  9
-
@item Level 10
-
@item Level 11
-
@item Level 12
-
@item Level 13
-
@item Level 14
-
@item Level 15
-
@item Level 16
-
@item Level 17
-
@item Level 18
-
@item Level 19
-
@item Level 20
-
@item Level 21
-
@item Level 22
-
@item Level 23
-
@item Level 24
-
@item Level 25
-
@item Level 26
-
@item Level 27
-
@item Level 28
-
@item Level 29
-
@item Level 30
-
@end table


@node Bard spell chart
@section Bard spell chart
@cindex bard spell book
@cindex spell book, bard

@c TODO fill table
@table @b
@item Level  2
-
@item Level  3
-
@item Level  4
-
@item Level  5
-
@item Level  6
-
@item Level  7
-
@item Level  8
-
@item Level  9
-
@item Level 10
-
@item Level 11
-
@item Level 12
-
@item Level 13
-
@item Level 14
-
@item Level 15
-
@item Level 16
-
@item Level 17
-
@item Level 18
-
@item Level 19
-
@item Level 20
-
@item Level 21
-
@item Level 22
-
@item Level 23
-
@item Level 24
-
@item Level 25
-
@item Level 26
-
@item Level 27
-
@item Level 28
-
@item Level 29
-
@item Level 30
-
@end table


@node Cleric spell chart
@section Cleric spell chart
@cindex cleric spell book
@cindex spell book, cleric

@c TODO fill table
@table @b
@item Level  1
-
@item Level  2
-
@item Level  3
-
@item Level  4
-
@item Level  5
-
@item Level  6
-
@item Level  7
-
@item Level  8
-
@item Level  9
-
@item Level 10
-
@item Level 11
-
@item Level 12
-
@item Level 13
-
@item Level 14
-
@item Level 15
-
@item Level 16
-
@item Level 17
-
@item Level 18
-
@item Level 19
-
@item Level 20
-
@item Level 21
-
@item Level 22
-
@item Level 23
-
@item Level 24
-
@item Level 25
-
@item Level 26
-
@item Level 27
-
@item Level 28
-
@item Level 29
-
@item Level 30
-
@end table


@node Druid spell chart
@section Druid spell chart
@cindex druid spell book
@cindex spell book, druid

@c TODO fill table
@table @b
@item Level  1
-
@item Level  2
-
@item Level  3
-
@item Level  4
-
@item Level  5
-
@item Level  6
-
@item Level  7
-
@item Level  8
-
@item Level  9
-
@item Level 10
-
@item Level 11
-
@item Level 12
-
@item Level 13
-
@item Level 14
-
@item Level 15
-
@item Level 16
-
@item Level 17
-
@item Level 18
-
@item Level 19
-
@item Level 20
-
@item Level 21
-
@item Level 22
-
@item Level 23
-
@item Level 24
-
@item Level 25
-
@item Level 26
-
@item Level 27
-
@item Level 28
-
@item Level 29
-
@item Level 30
-
@end table



@node Miscellaneous charts
@chapter Miscellaneous charts
@cindex miscellaneous charts

@menu
* Level 1 chart::              Level 1 chart.
* Actions slots::              Actions slots.
* Proficienies point chart::   Proficienies point depending on class and level.
* Weapon groups::              Weapons in the weapon groups.
* Corpse weight::              The weight of character corpses.
@end menu


@node Level 1 chart
@section Level 1 chart
@cindex level 1 chart
@cindex saving throws
@cindex to attack armour class 0
@cindex THAC0
@cindex hit point

The following chart refers to level 1 characters without any
adjustments. The chart is extended with multiclasses by
using arithmetic mean values.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.10 0.14 0.10 0.12 0.16 0.12 0.15 0.11
@item @b{Class}
@tab  @b{Hit points}
@tab  @b{THAC0}
@tab  @b{Bw save}@footnote{Save versus breath weapon}
@tab  @b{PPDm save}@footnote{Save versus death magic, paralyzation, or poison}
@tab  @b{PP save}@footnote{Save versus petrification or polymorph}
@tab  @b{RSW save}@footnote{Save versus rod, staff, or wand}
@tab  @b{S save}@footnote{Save versus spell}
@item Fighter   @tab 10  @tab 22  @tab 17  @tab 14  @tab 15  @tab 16  @tab 17
@item Ranger    @tab 10  @tab 22  @tab 17  @tab 14  @tab 15  @tab 16  @tab 17
@item Paladin   @tab 10  @tab 22  @tab 17  @tab 14  @tab 15  @tab 16  @tab 17
@item Thief     @tab  6  @tab 23  @tab 16  @tab 13  @tab 12  @tab 14  @tab 15
@item Bard      @tab  6  @tab 20  @tab 16  @tab 13  @tab 12  @tab 14  @tab 15
@item Mage      @tab  4  @tab 25  @tab 15  @tab 14  @tab 13  @tab 11  @tab 12
@item Sorcerer  @tab  4  @tab 25  @tab 15  @tab 14  @tab 13  @tab 11  @tab 12
@item Cleric    @tab  8  @tab 20  @tab 16  @tab 10  @tab 13  @tab 14  @tab 15
@item Druid     @tab  8  @tab 23  @tab 16  @tab 10  @tab 13  @tab 14  @tab 15
@end multitable


@node Actions slots
@section Actions slots
@cindex actions slots

Characters have several actions they can perform, however
there are five slots that depends on the class. Actions That
are not reachable in the these slots that one extra round,
and weapons are not usable if they are not placed in a quick
weapon slot. Items in quick weapon slot are considered to be
held in the character's hands.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.09 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.19
@item @b{Class}  @tab @b{Slot 1}    @tab @b{Slot 2}    @tab @b{Slot 3}    @tab @b{Slot 4}    @tab @b{Slot 5}
@item Fighter    @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab ---
@item Paladin    @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Cast spell
@item Ranger     @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Stealth       @tab Cast spell
@item Mage       @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item Sorcerer   @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item Cleric     @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item Druid      @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item Bard       @tab Quick weapon  @tab Bard song     @tab Thieving      @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item Thief      @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Find traps    @tab Thieving      @tab Stealth
@item F/T        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Find traps    @tab Thieving      @tab Stealth
@item F/M        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item F/C        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item F/D        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item R/C        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Stealth       @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item T/C        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Find traps    @tab Thieving      @tab Stealth       @tab Cast spell
@item M/T        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Find traps    @tab Thieving      @tab Stealth       @tab Cast spell
@item M/C        @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Quick spell   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@item F/M/T      @tab Quick weapon  @tab Find traps    @tab Thieving      @tab Stealth       @tab Cast spell
@item F/M/C      @tab Quick weapon  @tab Quick weapon  @tab Turn undead   @tab Quick spell   @tab Cast spell
@end multitable

It is not possible to dual class outside the definition if
this chart.

Thieving refers to, depending on usage, disarm trap, open
lock or pick pocket.


@node Proficienies point chart
@section Proficienies point chart
@cindex proficienies
@cindex weapon proficienies

Weapon proficiences depending on class and level,
non-cumulative. The chart is extended with multiclasses by
the best value.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.05 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.08
@item @b{Level} @tab @b{F} @tab @b{R} @tab @b{P} @tab @b{T}
@tab @b{B} @tab @b{C} @tab @b{D} @tab @b{M} @tab @b{S}
@item  1  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2
@item  2  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2
@item  3  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2  @tab  2
@item  4  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  2  @tab  2
@item  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3
@item  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3
@item  7  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3  @tab  3
@item  8  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  3  @tab  3
@item  9  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  3  @tab  3
@item 10  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4
@item 11  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4  @tab  4
@item 12  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  4  @tab  4
@item 13  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  4  @tab  4
@item 14  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  4  @tab  4
@item 15  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5  @tab  5
@item 16  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  5  @tab  5
@item 17  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  5  @tab  5
@item 18  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  5  @tab  5
@item 19  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  6  @tab  5  @tab  5
@item 20  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab 10  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  6  @tab  6
@item 21  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  6  @tab  6
@item 22  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  6  @tab  6
@item 23  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab 11  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  7  @tab  6  @tab  6
@item 24  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  6  @tab  6
@item 25  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  7  @tab  7
@item 26  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab 12  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  7  @tab  7
@item 27  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  8  @tab  7  @tab  7
@item 28  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  7  @tab  7
@item 29  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab 13  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  7  @tab  7
@item 30  @tab 14  @tab 14  @tab 14  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  9  @tab  8  @tab  8
@end multitable


@node Weapon groups
@section Weapon groups
@cindex weapon groups

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.24 0.12 0.24 0.20
@item @b{Group}  @tab  @b{weapon}  @tab  
@tab  @b{Weapon}  @tab  @b{group}
@item Axe  @tab battle axe  @tab  
@tab Bastard sword  @tab large swords
@item Axe  @tab throwing axe  @tab  
@tab Battle axe  @tab axe
@item Blunt weapons  @tab club  @tab  
@tab Club  @tab blunt weapons
@item Blunt weapons  @tab hand-to-hand  @tab  
@tab Composite long bow  @tab bow
@item Blunt weapons  @tab mace  @tab  
@tab Dagger  @tab small swords
@item Blunt weapons  @tab torch  @tab  
@tab Dart  @tab missile weapons
@item Blunt weapons  @tab quarterstaff  @tab  
@tab Flail  @tab spiked weapons
@item Blunt weapons  @tab war hammer  @tab  
@tab Halberd  @tab pole-arm
@item Bow  @tab composite long bow  @tab  
@tab Hand-to-hand  @tab blunt weapons
@item Bow  @tab long bow  @tab  
@tab Heavy crossbow  @tab missile weapons
@item Bow  @tab short bow  @tab  
@tab Light crossbow  @tab missile weapons
@item Large swords  @tab bastard sword  @tab  
@tab Long bow  @tab bow
@item Large swords  @tab long sword  @tab  
@tab Long sword  @tab large swords
@item Large swords  @tab two-handed sword  @tab  
@tab Mace  @tab blunt weapons
@item Missile weapons  @tab dart  @tab  
@tab Morning star  @tab spiked weapons
@item Missile weapons  @tab heavy crossbow  @tab  
@tab Short bow  @tab bow
@item Missile weapons  @tab light crossbow  @tab  
@tab Short sword  @tab small swords
@item Missile weapons  @tab sling  @tab  
@tab Sling  @tab missile weapons
@item Small swords  @tab dagger  @tab  
@tab Spear  @tab pol-arm
@item Small swords  @tab short sword  @tab  
@tab Throwing axe  @tab axe
@item Small swords  @tab throwing dagger  @tab  
@tab Throwing dagger  @tab small swords
@item Spiked weapons  @tab flail  @tab  
@tab Torch  @tab blunt weapons
@item Spiked weapons  @tab morning star  @tab  
@tab Two-handed sword  @tab large swords
@item Pole-arm  @tab spear  @tab  
@tab Quarterstaff  @tab blunt weapons
@item Pole-arm  @tab halberd  @tab  
@tab War hammer  @tab blunt weapons
@end multitable


@node Corpse weight
@section Corpse weight
@cindex corpse weight
@cindex body weight
@cindex strenght
@cindex constitution

The base weight for a corpse is 90 kg. The additional weight
depends on the character's strenght and constitution.
0,5 addition kg per constitution score, the following chart
maps the addition weight depending on the strenght.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.40
@item @b{Strenght}  @tab @b{Addition weight}
@item  1     @tab 0,5
@item  2     @tab 1,0
@item  3     @tab 1,5
@item  4     @tab 2,0
@item  5     @tab 2,5
@item  6     @tab 3,0
@item  7     @tab 3,5
@item  8     @tab 4,0
@item  9     @tab 4,5
@item 10     @tab 5,0
@item 11     @tab 5,5
@item 12     @tab 6,0
@item 13     @tab 6,5
@item 14     @tab 7,0
@item 15     @tab 7,5
@item 16     @tab 8,0
@item 17     @tab 8,5
@item 18     @tab 9,0
@item 18/01  @tab 9,05
@item 18/02  @tab 9,10
@item 18/03  @tab 9,15
@item ⋮      @tab ⋮
@item 18/97  @tab 13,85
@item 18/98  @tab 13,90
@item 18/99  @tab 13,95
@item 18/00  @tab 14,0
@item 19     @tab 14,5
@item 20     @tab 15,0
@item 21     @tab 15,5
@item 22     @tab 16,0
@item 23     @tab 16,5
@item 24     @tab 17,0
@item 25     @tab 17,5
@end multitable



@node Combat rules
@chapter Combat rules
@cindex combat rules
@cindex rules, combat

@menu
* Attack roll::                The attack roll, armour class and THAC0.
* Critical hits and misses::   Critical hits and misses.
* Casting spells::             Casting spells.
* Spell disruption::           Spell disruption.
* Hit points::                 About hit points.
* Natural healing::            Natural healing.
* Magical healing::            Magical healing.
* Raising the dead::           Raising the dead.
* Effects of poison::          Effects of poison.
* Effects of paralysis::       Effects of paralysis.
* Magic resistance::           Magic resistance.
* Changing armour::            Changing armour.
@end menu


@node Attack roll
@section Attack roll
@cindex attack roll
@cindex armour class
@cindex AC
@cindex THAC0
@cindex to hit armour class 0

Three factors decide whether an attack is successful,
neither effects the damage made: armour class (AC),
‘to hit armor class 0’ (THAC0) and attack roll. To
successfully hit a target the attack roll be at least
THAC0 − AC. The attack roll consists of 1D20 roll.

Without any adjustment (including armour) a character's
armour class is 10. The THAC0 depends on the character's
class and level, for each level up the characters receives
a −1 THAC0 bonus.


@node Critical hits and misses
@section Critical hits and misses
@cindex critical hits
@cindex critical misses
@cindex hits, critical
@cindex misses, critical

If a character rolls 20, before modifiers, on his attack
roll, a critical hit occurs and the damage for the attack is
doubled. If the value roll is 1 it is a critical miss, which
is a miss with a time penalty of one round. A critical hit
is always an hit, regardless of armour class and THAC0.


@node Casting spells
@section Casting spells
@cindex casting spells
@cindex spell casting

Spellcasters must memorise spells to be able to use them,
or use them directly from a scroll. Additionally a
spellcaster must be able to speak and may be paralised
or petrified to cast a spell, and the target must be in
sight.


@node Spell disruption
@section Spell disruption
@cindex spell disruption
@cindex disrupting spells

If a spellcaster is damage during a spell casting the spell
will disrupted and the spell memorisation will be lost as it
would be if it was not disrupted. Spells are also disrupted
if the spellcaster performs another action.


@node Hit points
@section Hit points
@cindex hit points

Creatures have a maximum hit point beyond which the creature
cannot be healed. Some necromantic spell increase or
decrease a creatures maximum hit point. It is also increase
when a characters levels up.


@node Natural healing
@section Natural healing
@cindex natural healing

Characters that are not in combat can heal naturally, call
regeneration. This is utilised more effectively during
sleep, specially in comfortable room in an inn.

Sleep cannot always be done indoors, and cannot be done
while there are emenies nearby. Sleeping, except for at
Inns, you run a risk of being attacked.


@node Magical healing
@section Magical healing
@cindex magical healing

Characters, including foes, can use spells, potions and
magical devices to considerably heal themself or other
characters. Healing can other be instant or continuous.


@node Raising the dead
@section Raising the dead
@cindex raising the dead
@cindex resurrection

Dead characters are uneffected by spells other then Raise
Dead and Resurrection. Newly raised characters will have
only on hit point and require addition healing.

A character dies when his hit points reaches zero. If the
character'shit points reached −10 at point of death, the
character is beyond resurrection.

Dead characters, that are resurrectable, will leave a body
item that the other characters must carry to a temple to
resurrect, or to any other place, if they do not wise to
resurrect the character right there.


@node Effects of poison
@section Effects of poison
@cindex effects of poison
@cindex poison

Charaters can be poisoned, their are many sources, poisoned
weapons and ammunition, venomous creatures, potions, bad
food and drugges wines. Poisoned characters will be hurt a
hit point or two every so often; healing spells and potions
will not negate the progress, rather a poison specialised
potion or spell must be used.


@node Effects of paralysis
@section Effects of paralysis
@cindex effects of paralysis
@cindex paralysis

A creature affected by paralysis cannot speak, move, attack,
defend or cast spell during the effect of the spell.


@node Magic resistance
@section Magic resistance
@cindex magic resistance
@cindex resistance against magic

Magic resistance gives a creature a change to ignore the
effect of magic, both protective and destructive magic, but
not priest spells. If the creature fails to utilise magic
resistance, saving throw against that spell can be used.


@node Changing armour
@section Changing armour
@cindex changing armour
@cindex changing body armour

Changing body armour takes two rounds and cannot be done
during combat. Just adding or just removing the armour
takes one round.




@node Time rules
@chapter Time rules
@cindex time rules
@cindex rules, time

@menu
* Speed factor::               What is speed factor?
* Casting time::               What is casting time?
* Turns and rounds::           What is turns and rounds?
@end menu


@node Speed factor
@section Speed factor
@cindex speed factor

Speed factors are numbers between 1 and 10, the number of
tenths of a round an attack takes.


@node Casting time
@section Casting time
@cindex casting time

Casting times for spellcaster is exactly analogous to speed
factors of weapons.


@node Turns and rounds
@section Turns and rounds
@cindex turn
@cindex round

A turn consists of ten rounds. The notation of rounds are
merely to simply the thinking of how time passes. One round
corresponds to ten minutes in the game, hence one turn
corresponds to one minute in the game.

None attack attack often take one round or one turn, while
attack actions takes from one turn to one round. Removing
the armour, putting on a armour, digging in the backpack
all take one round. Many special abilities takes one turn.



@node Inventory and equipment
@chapter Inventory and equipment
@cindex inventory
@cindex equipment

@menu
* Personal inventory::         Personal inventory.
* Quick items::                Quick items.
* The left hand::              The left hand.
* The right hand::             The right hand.
* The quiver::                 The quiver.
* Body armour slot::           Body armour slot.
* Gauntlets and bracers slot:: Gauntlets and bracers slot.
* Headgear slot::              Headgear slot.
* Amulet and necklace slot::   Amulet and necklace slot.
* Ring slots::                 Ring slots.
* Belt and girdle slot::       Belt and girdle slot.
* Boots slot::                 Boots slot.
* Cloak slot::                 Cloak slot.
* Miscellaneous items::        Miscellaneous items.
@end menu


@node Personal inventory
@section Personal inventory
@cindex personal inventory

Every character have an inventory where you have your items;
your parties gold are items, classified as gems, that you
character must hold in their inventory. Items can often be
places in specialist solts; all items, regardless of whether
they can be put it such slots, can be places in the personal
inventory where items you pickup automatically are placed.
The personal inventory is your packback and consists of 16
item slots, all items takes up one slot. Before you move
your items from the personal inventory to a specialisted
slot you should check whether it is cursed. Cursed items
cannot be removed from a specialisted slot, the only way to
remove it is to cast the spell Remove curse, which puts it
in the personal inventory, or if full, drops it on the
ground.


@node Quick items
@section Quick items
@cindex quick items
@cindex spell scroll
@cindex wand
@cindex rod
@cindex staff
@cindex usable item
@cindex potion

Every character have three quick item slots, you should but
you important potions, wands and spell scrolls here, it
allows to use items without digging in your backpack.
Quick items can often be bundled into a limited bundle of
identical items, taking up just one slot.

Item you can put in your quick item slots include:

@itemize @bullet
@item  Potions
@item  Magic scrolls/books
@item  Magic wands/rods/staffs
@end itemize


@node The left hand
@section The left hand
@cindex left hand
@cindex hand
@cindex weapon

Every character have quick weapon slots, one to five,
depending on the class. The quick weapons is in the left
hand. Torches are considered weapons because they are,
inferior, clubs on fire.

See @ref{Weapons} for details, hand-to-hand refers to
the abstense of equipment.


@node The right hand
@section The right hand
@cindex hand
@cindex weapon
@cindex shield

Every character have one right hand slot which can either
be used for a weapon or a shield.

Shields in order of size, see @ref{Armour types} for
details:

@itemize
@item  Buckler
@item  Small shield
@item  Medium shield
@item  Large shield
@end itemize

@node The quiver
@section The quiver
@cindex quiver
@cindex ammunition

Every character have three quiver slots where you put your
ammunition you want to used.

Ammunition items can often be bundled into a limited bundle
of identical items, taking up just one slot.

@table @b
@item Arrow
Ammunition for bows.
@item Bolt
Ammunition for crossbows.
Also called quarrel.
@item Bullet
Ammunition (stones) for slings.
@end table


@node Body armour slot
@section Body armour slot
@cindex body armour
@cindex armour

Characters have one slot for body armour.

There are seven types of body armour, see @ref{Armour} for
details.

@itemize @bullet
@item  Robe
@item  Leather armour
@item  Studded leather armour
@item  Chain mail
@item  Splint mail
@item  Plate mail
@item  Full plate mail
@end itemize


@node Gauntlets and bracers slot
@section Gauntlets and bracers slot
@cindex gauntlets
@cindex bracers

Characters have one slot for gauntlets and braces, they
must used in full pairs.

There is no categorisation of gauntlets and braces, and they
have no natural effect.


@node Headgear slot
@section Headgear slot
@cindex headgear

Characters have one slot for headgear.

See @ref{Headgear} for details.


@node Amulet and necklace slot
@section Amulet and necklace slot
@cindex amulet
@cindex necklace

Characters have one slot for amulets, necklaces and locket.

There is no categorisation of amulets, necklaces and locket, and
they have no natural effect.


@node Ring slots
@section Ring slots
@cindex ring

Characters have two slots for rings.

There is no categorisation of rings, and they have no
natural effect.


@node Belt and girdle slot
@section Belt and girdle slot
@cindex belt
@cindex girdle

Characters have one slot for belts and girdles.

There is no categorisation of belts and girdles, and they
have no natural effect.


@node Boots slot
@section Boots slot
@cindex boots
@cindex shoes

Characters have one slot for boots and other types of
shoes, they must used in full pairs.

There is no categorisation of boots, and they have no
natural effect.


@node Cloak slot
@section Cloak slot
@cindex cloak

Charactes have one cloak for slots.

There is no categorisation of cloaks, and they have no
natural effect.


@node Miscellaneous items
@section Miscellaneous items
@cindex miscellaneous items

Miscellaneous items are items that do not fit in any
specialisted slot and can only be put in the personal
inventory.

@table @b
@item Text scrolls/books
Item contain text that may help you in your quest.
@item Gems and gold
Items with nothing else then monetary value.
@item Keys
Quest specific keys.
@item Bodies
Bodies of dead characters.
@item Containers
Item contains, usually they decrease the effect weight
of the items they contain.
@end table



@node Map and environment
@chapter Map and environment

@menu
* The map::                    The map.
* The environment::            The environment.
@end menu


@node The map
@section The map
@cindex map

@cindex locked doors
@cindex doors
@cindex world map
@cindex area map
@cindex major area
The game consists of a world map and and area maps. The
world map is a network of area maps, area maps can contain
other area maps. In an area map there are connections to
other area maps, they may be of another area map in the
world map (a major area), or they may or may not be blocked
by a locked doored. Locked doors can often be opened by
picking or bashing, but sometimes they are opened by quest
events.

When reaching the edge of a major area it is possible that
you can detect new major areas, but sometimes they are only
added to your map by quest events. When going to the edge of
a major area all neighbouring major areas that are in your
map, or detected, become visitable which means that you can
go to it at any time you reach any major area edge.

@cindex area distance
@cindex map area distance
@cindex waylay
Major areas have distances between them which effects how
long it takes for your party to reach the target area.
While traviling there is risk of running into enemies,
which is decided by a die roll depending on the road.
The risk of running into enemies is doubled during the
dark hours.


@node The environment
@section The environment
@cindex environment

@cindex rest
@cindex sleep
Whether you can rest or not depends on the environment,
generally you will be able to rest outdoors but not indoors
(except for rented room). When you rest there is a risk
that your sleep will be interrupted, it can either be by
hostiles or by guards telling you that you man not spell
there and should find an inn.

@cindex items
@cindex hostiles
@cindex creatures
An environment consists of items an creatures. Some items
you can take with you, others are stuck and you can look
inside them for other items, the latter may be locked in the
same way as doors. Creatures have positions and may be
hostile. Hostile creatures may be resurrected when you leave
the area.



@node Dice and modifiers
@chapter Dice and modifiers
@cindex dice
@cindex modifiers

There are two types of modifiers, units and procents. A unit
modifier is added to the outcome of a die roll and procents
are multiplied to the agumented die roll, it usually is less
than 100 %, but can be higher than 100 %.

A die roll is written as the number of dice followed by the
die type, that is the number of sides on the dice prepending
by a `D'. D6 is a regular six-sided die, and 2D6 is two such
dice whose value are added.

This game uses ten different dice. First off, there three
simulated dice, D2, D3 and D100. D2 is simulated by a
dividing a D4's values and round up, D3 works the same way
but uses a D6. D100 is simulated by rolling two separate D10
dice, the first roll times 10 plus the second roll, which
roll with a modulo 10 agument determines the outcome of a
D100 roll. Then there are five plutonic solids, D4, D6, D8,
D12 and D20. Finally there are two non-plutonic solids with
uniform stocastic distribution: D10 and D24.



@node Miscellaneous rules
@chapter Miscellaneous rules
@cindex miscellaneous rules

@menu
* Protagonists::               Protagonists.
* Gather the party::           Gather the party.
* Beyond resurrection::        Beyond resurrection,
@end menu


@node Protagonists
@section Protagonists
@cindex protagonists
@cindex party

When you create start a new game you create new characters,
to play with, at least one, but the maximum depends on the
game senario. Unless changed my the game senario the
characters you create a protagonists.

Provided that the game actually has any protagonists, the
game is lost when all protagonists are dead, even if that
are resurrectable. Otherwise, the game is lost when all
characters in the party are dead.

Protagonists cannot be removed from the party.


@node Gather the party
@section Gather the party
@cindex gather party
@cindex party, gather
@cindex travelling
@cindex resting

Your party can split up, there are however two occations
when to party needs to be gathered: when resting and
travelling long distances.


@node Beyond resurrection
@section Beyond resurrection
@cindex beyond resurrection
@cindex resurrection, beyond
@cindex critical death
@cindex death, critical

A character or creature dies when the hit points reaches
zero. If the hit point goes 10 points below zero, he is
beyond resurrection and will never re-enter the game. This
is known as a critical death.



@node Menus and line input
@chapter Menus and line input
@cindex menus
@cindex line input
@cindex input, menus
@cindex input, line

@menu
* Score assignment menus::     Using score assignment menus.
* Multiselection menus::       Using multiselection menus.
* Line input::                 Line input.
* Dialogues::                  Dialogue.
* Starting the game::          Starting the game.
* Creating your party::        Creating your party.
* Item and spell selection::   Item and spell selection.
@end menu


@node Score assignment menus
@section Score assignment menus
@cindex score assignment menus
@cindex assignment menus
@cindex menus, score assignment

We you assign score to abilities you will have a number of
score points to assign. There will always be a lower limit
for each abilities, and sometimes there is a maximum.

You can use the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrows, or
@kbd{enter} instead of the @kbd{down} arrows, to navigate,
the curreny line is marked in bright blue. Use the
@kbd{left} and @kbd{right} arrows to remove and add score
points, respectively.

At any time you can use the @kbd{S} key to store the current
assignment and @kbd{R} to restore the last stored
assignments. When you assign strenght, constitution, et
cetera, the points are decided by rolling dices, meaning
that the number of assignable points (that are automatically
pre-assigned) is random. In this can use @kbd{C-r}
@footnote{@kbd{C-} means that Control is held down.}
to reroll can get new scores.

When you are done, press @kbd{D}, if you want to abort and
redo the last action you can press @kbd{C-g}.


@node Multiselection menus
@section Multiselection menus
@cindex multiselection menus
@cindex menus, multiselection

Multiselection menus are menu where you can check which
attributes want, and have a fixed number of attributes
that most be selected. Each attributes can be selected once,
when selected, a bright green `X' is visible left of it.

You can use the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrows, or
@kbd{enter} instead of the @kbd{down} arrows, to navigate,
the curreny line is marked in bright blue. Use the
@kbd{left} and @kbd{right} arrows to unselect and select,
respectively. @kbd{spacebar} can used to toggle selection.

When you are done, press @kbd{D}, if you want to abort and
redo the last action you can press @kbd{C-g}.


@node Line input
@section Line input
@cindex line input
@cindex input line

When you are prompted for a line input there are three
possibilies, arbitrary non-empty string, single choice, and
file selection.

Pressing @kbd{C-g} will abort and go to the last action;
if you are prompted for an arbitrary non-empty string,
pressing @kbd{enter} when the line is empty will have the
same effect. Otherwise @kbd{enter} will continue to the
next action if the input is valid, or, if the input is
invalid, list valid inputs.

If you are prompted for a file, you can drag and drop a file
input your terminal emulator and press enter, as long as
your terminal emulator handles file drag and drop in the
standard way --- quoted with single quotes and with a
tailing blank space --- or if as the filename in raw format.

This table lists available key bindings, other than
@kbd{C-g} and @kbd{enter}.

@table @kbd
@item C-x C-x
Swap the mark and the point.
@item C-x C-c
Disable, or enable, @kbd{C-spacebar} and @kbd{C-@@}.
@c @item C-x C-u
@item C-d
@kbd{Enter} if the input is valid, @kbd{C-g} if invalid.
@item C-?
@itemx backspace
Remove previous character, of if a selection is set, remove
the selection portion of the input.
@item C-spacebar
@itemx C-@@
@itemx C-c
Set or deactivate mark.
@item home
@itemx C-a
Go to the beginning of the input.
@item end
@itemx C-e
Go to the end of the input.
@item delete
Remove current character, of if a selection is set, remove
the selection portion of the input.
@c @item C-delete
@c @item prior
@c @item next
@c @item up
@c @itemx C-p
@c @item down
@c @itemx C-n
@item left
@itemx C-b
Go to the previous character.
@item right
@itemx C-f
Go to the next character.
@item S-left@footnote{@kbd{S-} means that Shift is held down.}
Go to the previous character and set mark if none is active.
@item S-right
Go to the next character and set mark if none is active.
@c @item C-left
@c @item C-right
@c @item C-S-left
@c @item C-S-right
@c @item backtab
@c @item M-y@footnote{@kbd{M-} means that Meta is held down.}
@c @item M-x
@c @item M-f
@c @item M-b
@c @item tab
@c @item C-y
@c @item C-_
@c @itemx C-¿
@c @item C-O
@c @item C-t
@item C-k
Remove current character and all following.
@item C-w
Remove the selected portion of the input.
@item C-l
Redraw the prompt, useful if printk or something else have
printed over the input.
@end table


@node Dialogues
@section Dialogues
@cindex dialogues
@cindex input, dialogues

Dialogues are one of the major parts of the game. Caution,
depending on the game senario low intelligence, may cause
a character to not be able to speak properly.

You can walk a ways from a dialog by pressing @kbd{C-g},
otherwise you press @kbd{enter}, @kbd{spacebar} or the
@kbd{right} arrow key. Often, but not always, you can
reply, in this case, you select a reply and press
@kbd{enter}, @kbd{spacebar} or the @kbd{right} arrow key.
Use the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrow keys to navigate,
or use the number in front of the reply to select it
directly without having to press @kbd{enter},
@kbd{spacebar} or the @kbd{right} arrow key.

If the dialogue have been obstructed by printk or something
similar, you can press @kbd{C-l} to redraw the dialogue.


@node Starting the game
@section Starting the game
@cindex starting the game
@cindex input, starting the game

When you start the game will are asked for a game senario.
Use the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrow keys to navigate and
press @kbd{enter}, @kbd{spacebar} or the @kbd{right} arrow
key. You can also the number, or letter, in front of the
senario you want to play.

You can press @kbd{C-g} to exit.

When you start playing you are, unless you play a weird
senario, welcomed by a prologue, these are, like chapter
introductions and books, navigated with the arrow keys,
@kbd{page up}(@kbd{prior}) and @kbd{page down}(@kbd{next}).
To continue, press @kbd{C-c}, @kbd{C-d}, @kbd{C-g}, @kbd{q}
or @kbd{w}.

If the text have been obstructed by printk or something
similar, you can press @kbd{C-l} to redraw the text.


@node Creating your party
@section Creating your party
@cindex creating your party
@cindex party, creating
@cindex input, party

When you start a senario the first thing you do is to create
your party. The number of characters you can have depends on
the senario, but you will always need atleast one character.

Use the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrow keys to navigate, and
@kbd{enter}, @kbd{spacebar} or the @kbd{right} arrow key
to create a new charcter, this will overwrite an existing
character if not aborted.

To remove a character press @kbd{r}, @kbd{C-g} to abort, and
@kbd{C-d} to complete and start playing.

If the form have been obstructed by printk or something
similar, you can press @kbd{C-l} to redraw the form.



@node Item and spell selection
@section Item and spell selection
@cindex input, selection
@cindex input, item
@cindex input, spell
@cindex selection, item
@cindex selection, spell
@cindex item, selection
@cindex spell, selection

During game play you can select items, such as weapons and
spells to use. When this is done in a simple menu, which
is navigated with the @kbd{up} and @kbd{down} arrow keys,
and is exited with @kbd{C-d}, @kbd{spacebar}, @kbd{enter},
@kbd{d} or the another arrow key. The action can be aborted
with @kbd{C-g}.

If the menu have been obstructed by printk or something
similar, you can press @kbd{C-l} to redraw the menu.



@node License of tbrpg
@appendix License of tbrpg

@flushleft
tbrpg – Text based roll playing game

Copyright © 2012  Mattias Andrée (maandree@@kth.se)

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@end flushleft

@node GNU General Public License
@appendix GNU General Public License
@include doc/gpl.texinfo

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doc/fdl.texinfo

@node Concept and program index
@appendix Concept and program index
@printindex pg

@node Variable and option index
@appendix Variable and option index
@printindex vr


@bye

